We're talking to Curtis Wong, is that correct?
That's right.
And your position, your title here?
Oh, well, I see.
My title these days is Director of Publishing Strategy.
I see.
So your job basically is to determine.
I think about the long term of what this place does as a business.
and how we create the things that we create, what we create, how it fits in the larger picture of where this company is going.
Can you break that down a little bit for me?
That's a strategic, I guess... That's a strategic thing.
Thinking about, we've done a number of CD-ROM titles, why we pick what we pick, how those things are going to take us into the next realm of what electronic publishing might be like, how those things work with this large digital image archive that we're creating,
why we have both of them.
We can get into a discussion of that in a little while, and that's actually pretty interesting.
Okay, well, I'd like to do that, and if it seems like I'm ignorant about these areas, just put me on track and talk about it.
But you also, in general, determine the ways that these stories, if we want to call them that, these narratives.
You have, I don't know how many images you have at your disposal.
There must be millions of them now.
We have, well,
Along with the Bettman Arpacay, we have about 16 million images, of which about 700,000 are in digital form right now, and soon by the end of the year it will be about a million.
So that's progressing.
The area that I helped to get started here in this company deals with doing CD-ROMs.
The first one I did was called The Passion for Art.
I don't know if you've seen that.
It's about the Barnes Foundation.
Will I be able to get a copy of that?
Sure, we'll get you copies of all of those.
Let me also say, incidentally, you might be interested.
I'm just pointing out something.
Okay.
It has nothing to do with my question.
When I read in the New York Times, I guess it was February of the purchase of the Bettman Archive.
Right.
I read that Otto was alive and well and lucid and living in Florida.
Florida.
I went and did a two-day interview with him.
Oh, good.
And this new book will start.
The prologue will be with Otto Bettman playing the organ, playing a violin.
And I say to him, why Bach?
And he said, I like Bach.
Always returns to the same place that he started.
You know, if you have two chapters called Continuum, and you really are talking about life beyond life, I just thought that, and plus he has lived and touched every decade of the 20th century.
And plus he was a rare books librarian at Leipzig, and plus he was an emigre.
I'm having a chapter in the emigre booksellers who were forced out by Hitler, all the survivors.
how they totally influence the change of the flow of books, not the collectors, but the institutions, to the point that American collections are preeminent now in certain areas.
I mean, they have to come here.
The Europeans have to come here to see how they're all in history.
Interesting, because of Hitler.
Roger started at Harvard and said, it's amazing how much we owe to Hitler here at Harvard, and he says it without guile or irony, you know.
Anyway, Otto touches so many different
I'm sorry, but I thought you'd be interested.
No, I am interested.
Go ahead.
I'm sorry, what you were about to say.
You did say before we put on the tape recorder, I love books, I wouldn't give up.
Why don't we just talk about that?
Sure.
My own love for books.
Yeah, your own passion feeling or whatever.
Well, I think it's interesting.
One of the questions I always get asked when we're doing interactive is, well,
Now that you're doing CD-ROMs, we don't need books anymore.
We don't need to go to art museums anymore.
I say, you know, that's not the case at all.
I mean, I think that I love books.
I would never give up books.
It's really hard for me to get rid of a book, and that's one of my problems.
I've got boxes and boxes of books.
I also love movies, too.
And to me, they're two very different things that both provide a way of telling stories and giving you information.
And I think one of the problems with people doing interactive CD-ROMs early on is that they took material, repurposed material, from a book and, quote, turned it into a CD or tried to turn a movie into a CD, and that just didn't work.
Because it's hard to beat a book.
It's portable.
It's much clearer resolution-wise, being able to look at the type and look at pictures.
You don't need to buy a computer for it.
You don't have to plug it in anywhere.
It's cheap.
You can go fast or slow.
You can go anywhere you want in the book.
That's right.
It doesn't need batteries.
I mean, it's great.
The only problem is that there's some limitations with books.
Some of that experience that you're trying to communicate.
Now, I don't think that movies are better than books because whenever you go to a movie, you always say, you know, it wasn't as good as the book.
You know, when have you ever heard
You know, books say it wasn't as good as the movie.
There are a few exceptions.
Only a few.
Gone with the Wind is probably a much better movie than it was a book.
And maybe The Godfather, too.
Yeah.
But, you know.
But most of the time... I can only think of two examples.
Yeah.
Most of the time, people feel that the book is better.
Because it's hard to get the depth and richness that you can get in a book.
That's right.
But films... Can I just... Sure.
Because one of the things that a movie does, and that a CD-run does,
know that a CD-1 doesn't do.
There is a linear approach to a good movie.
Right.
If you have a novel that has all this depth of character and all these different things, you're not necessarily working in that manner.
You lose all of that in a 120-page... Right, because you have to condense it into two hours.
I don't know if that's relevant to anything, but you do have to think in a linear way how to do things that you can't
express in a linear way in a book, I guess, that you can't necessarily do.
Right.
So there's shortcomings in books.
Shortcomings in films are like the brevity issue that you're talking about.
But one of the things we love about movies is that movies really are, you know, the music and the dialogue and the images.
It really kind of transports you somewhere.
And sometimes better than the text in a book.
And what we try and do with our CD-ROMs is, you know, in my thinking about what's wrong with Interactive, is to not try and replicate either of those.
But you try and create an experience on CD-ROM that's the best of both and the worst of neither.
So whenever we create our things, I always ask, you know, how is this better than a book?
How is this better than a movie?
Because if it's the same thing, why do we need it?
So we try and create that element out of each title that's a unique kind of experience.
And let's point out that of the 16 or 17 million images that you have access to,
You've only done four CD roms.
Exactly.
So you're really choosing your targets quite mindfully and having a great deal of thought.
And how can we attach a narrative to this?
We have all these images.
How can we stitch them together to make something?
That's the other part.
The other half that's equally important is that it's not just about information.
For us, it's about story.
There has to be a good story.
Because for me, story provides the context and background and interest to make you want to get into the material.
And I think a lot of CD-ROMs started first from the reference model.
Oh, look how much space we have here.
Let's fill it up.
Let's put the complete works of Sir Arthur Conan Doyle on CD-ROM.
Great, all the text is there.
Who wants to read it?
You know a soul?
You know anyone alive who has read a novel?
page one to the end.
On the computer screen?
No way.
Why would you bother?
Nobody probably ever will.
It's too much work.
It just doesn't look right.
The value of that is being able to have the computer search for information.
That unquestionably has value.
To be able to search across lots of books to find citations and passages.
That's when you're doing directed search for information.
That's in a reference mode.
For me,
how do you get somebody interested in a subject if they don't know anything about it?
How do I know what to ask for if I don't know the first question to ask?
And to me, that's the point of a CD.
It's to create that kind of engagement, give you the background, allow you to explore, get you excited about it, know enough to help you find things that you're interested in that, and then you go and read more books about those particular areas.
Then you want to go find other films.
To me, it's
a way of entering a subject area where you don't have a lot of background.
Like for me, the first CD-ROM I did was a passion for art.
Well, people always ask me, do you have an art history background?
I mean, you know, and all this kind of stuff about art, and I said, you know, if you only knew.
In college, you know, I took one class in art called Integrated Arts, and it was this huge auditorium with 500 people in there, and there was a professor that sat up in front, dark, and was flashing each slide on the screen, and the assumption was that you knew all about
art and artists and all these other things through time, I had no context.
I didn't remember anything because I didn't know any interesting stories that he was attaching to it, the interrelationships between things, one ear off the other.
So how do you explain then this remarkable CD that you were able to produce?
Because in a conversation I had with Ken Burns, he echoed kind of the same thing.
He said, sometimes you have to be dumb as a stone and ask those questions.
So wait a minute, wait a minute.
Before you get into that, you know, what's the background here?
You know,
You have to create engagement first.
All of our CDs start with this little opening, and it's about 90 seconds, 60 to 90 seconds long, that, in a nutshell, tells you the story, and it's a hook, just like the pre-title sequence of a movie.
It grabs you and brings you in, and then you want to say, oh, well, that's interesting.
Tell me more.
You see, now, the Barnes story in particular is fascinating.
It is.
I mean, I happen to know it.
I reviewed the book for Clark.
There you go.
You know, this thing was set up down in Philly, and nobody can go see it unless you have tremendous
Right.
And nobody even knew this stuff was there.
People are making something available, but really is not otherwise available, I guess, anywhere else.
Anywhere else.
Yeah.
But you also had a story.
We had the story.
We started with the story, and that was a little hook, and then the next thing we have is a little welcome by Carter Brown.
And here is the counterpoint to the opening.
Here's a guy who's head of the National Gallery of Art for 25 years, telling you that this is the greatest private collection
you know, that a post-impression draft has ever been there.
So there you go, wow, it's not just a sensational story about this guy collecting all these paintings.
This is really significant.
And then the next thing, there are four guided tours, and it starts broad.
You know, the first question is, well, who is this guy Barnes, and where did he get his money?
Why did he collect all these things?
And that's the first story.
And then the next thing narrows a little bit further.
Then we take you through, but with a guy named Joe Richard, who's curator of European painting.
at the Philadelphia Museum.
Room by room, he talks about their major masterpiece, and you find out, my God, some of the greatest paintings of Matisse's career and these other artists are there, a place that people don't get into.
Then you narrow a little bit further, thematically.
Carter Brown does a tour, and he talks about the theme of the female nude in art.
He talks about some of the same paintings that were mentioned earlier, but it's done a different way, so you get a little bit more context, and a little bit stories about different paintings as well.
Then you narrow down to
the story on the Matisse dance mural.
It's an in-depth look at the creation of a single work of art.
You've really kind of funneled it down to a case study of one work of art.
And in that study, you learn about Matisse as a human being, that he worked on this painting, and he struggled, and he finally thought he was finished, and he realized he measured wrong and had to start all over again.
And you learn about the creative process, but you learn about his humanity.
He's not just some legendary artist.
He's a real human being.
And you're able to do this visually.
You do it visually, you do it with music.
I think the thing that really engages people about this title is the music.
And because in a moment of the dance tour, there's a particular strong emotional moment in there, and we have a certain kind of music that goes with it.
And then at the end of the title, we have closing credits, just like you do in a movie theater.
And in those credits, we have that same music that echoes the same part of that particular tour, because I want people to think back about that experience they had
And they have that experience when they're, quote, leaving the theater or leaving the title.
And I had more people come to me and say, God, I love that music and that credit.
It just makes me feel so good about the title.
And it's very much orchestrating an experience from the very beginning to the very end.
We're telling stories and shaping that experience.
But what is it about this title that gives people something different than they don't get in a book as well or in a movie?
It's the experience of recreating the barns, learning about
You know, you're in the main gallery, room one, and you're looking at this wall, and you can go through these doorways and learn about this Van Gogh here in the corner.
And what you're getting is you're getting a sense of scale.
Wow, here's the wall.
Look how big that painting is.
I didn't know it was that big.
And when you look in books and everything's reproduced the same size to fill the page to make it, you know, look as good as it's possible, you don't know if it's the size of a postage stamp or the size of a wall.
Yeah.
And the reason why I brought, I felt that was important is because when I was a kid, still not knowing any of my art,
But in elementary school, they put little prints of art on the wall so that kids would become familiar with it.
The only art I had seen was the dogs playing poker at home.
So there was this picture by Suraj called Sunday in the Park on the Isle of Grunja.
I never knew about that painting.
I just remember that picture.
And it was this big.
It was about two feet by two feet on this print on the wall, and it was hung low because it was in second grade.
And when I finally got as an adult to the Art Institute of Chicago and saw the real thing, it amazed me that the thing is the size of, you know, this huge wall.
It's like a mural.
And so I realized that art is something that's created at arm's length.
So scale is important.
So the idea is to try and communicate that sense of scale, attach stories to those things, learn about the artist, what he was doing.
And we tried to put that in the experience in going through the gallery itself.
Let me go.
I just want to see.
give me an idea of how you just described how you create a process if i may you know that they put together this cd now did you script it did you sit down i've got this material i mean it's like almost like writing a book it was almost like writing a story and producing a play and you've got music and you've got
visual stuff, and you've got narration.
It comes in succession, but the beginning of it probably is very much like what you do, which is thinking of a treatment.
What is this going to be about?
And for a passion for art, it was called something different back then, was just a one or two page description of what this thing could be.
And for me, it was my way of synthesizing, okay, I don't know much about art, but what kind of art experience would I like to have?
And for me, it's
to be able to walk around the gallery with an expert telling me, you know, so what's the big deal?
I don't know anything about it.
And he'll tell you stories about the artist.
He'll tell you about the work.
He'll tell you about, you know, why it's important.
And I need that.
You know, to me, it's all about context.
We created this timeline in A Passion for Art that we've included in a number of other titles where we put the works in
by the artist sort of visually, chronologically, but you can see them over time.
I've seen the Cezanne one, by the way.
Oh, okay.
And I love that you have the little... The little squares?
The little pictures, yeah.
Yeah.
I mean, that's something you're not going to get someplace else.
Right.
But we tried to put other things, like events in music and literature and history, to give people context of, you know, oh, Stravinsky was working on the Rite of Spring when Renoir was being.
I didn't know they were alive at the same time.
you know, maybe there are some influences there.
And that was sort of the beginning of thinking about, holistically, of how things interrelate, that art just isn't in isolation.
So how do you see yourself as a writer, as a producer, as a director?
Well, I think in that, my credit is producer and director, because there are two parts of that job.
One is producing, which is the business part of, I hired the team, I got the project started,
figured out the budget and the schedule and getting all these people going.
So all these things are parts of the equation, aren't they?
Exactly.
And then the director part is, you know, I'm visualizing here's how I want this scene to look, here's the information, here's where you go from here, and directing people on how you want things to work and look, that's the directing part of it.
Are you thinking in terms of a screen like this, whereas I have to believe I'm
a Hollywood person that's thinking of a big screen or a TV person?
I don't know.
Same thing.
I mean, what I did probably the second week of starting to work on A Passion for Art was storyboard.
I drew on pieces of paper.
Here's what the first thing.
If you go here, you zoom in, and here's a wall.
And if you click on the wall, you'll see a close-up.
And if you go through this doorway, you'll end up going here.
And I had these ideas of showing
a map and having these little stick pins show up on the map, and there would be different artists and works, and you could slide the slider and see different pins and say, oh, wow, look, Renoir and Cezanne were painting at the same place at the same time.
It turned out to be impossible to try and do that, but there were ideas like that where we'd just say, what would a really interesting experience be like, and what could we put up there?
So in terms of the technology, what do you have to know about the technology?
Well, I have to sort of know
somewhat the bounds of the technology, what's possible, but I don't constrain myself to that.
I mean, I think when we were thinking about Leonardo da Vinci, and I'll show you that, yeah, I mean, I'll show you the original treatment for it.
I was present at the sale, by the way, when Boogings bought that.
Oh, you were?
And it's in my book, by the way.
Oh, how exciting.
I've always been very much interested in Codex, and when it was on display for four weeks,
It was on display at the Corcoran for two weeks.
That's right.
And then right after it went from there, I went to L.A.
County Museum, and I saw it there.
It was on display for four weeks.
That was 1981, I think in May or something, or March.
When was it recent than that?
81.
You mean when it was sold?
When it was first sold to Arm & Hammer.
Oh, to Arm & Hammer.
Yeah.
Okay.
I was at the sale that we built.
Oh, Bill bought it.
Okay.
Oh, my interest goes... Even prior to that.
Yeah, 1981.
I was there.
It was a whole consortium.
And he helped bid the Italian government.
Right.
But he did a nice thing and loaned it back to them.
I believe that he's going to take better care of it than anybody.
Anybody who spends $30 million.
You better.
If you see my book, I'm
I believe in the private owner of things, and it's the reason things are safe.
That's an essential theme of my book.
I'm sorry, Andrew.
No, go ahead, Andrew.
I love these side topics, too.
Are you mindful of who your audience is when you're doing this?
Well, yes or no.
When I'm writing my book, I have a general idea who's going to read it, and you really hope that you're going to cross over.
I know my core audience, I know what my bread and butter is, but I also know that if I tell a good story, I'm going to get that general audience, which I did.
Well, that's exactly what I tried to do with a passion for art.
I mean, I created it, in a sense, for me, somebody like me, who has an interest in art or knows that they should, or has wanted to have an interest in art, but maybe didn't have the time or wherewithal to learn more about it.
And I had hoped by making it that accessible that I would then appeal to a larger audience.
Because I knew if I created enough significant scholarly material in there or put enough interesting material in there, I'd appeal to the core audience of people who are really interested in the barns or really interested in the specific artists there.
But I wanted to open it up.
I wanted it to be a point of entry of learning about art so that from there they say, oh, yeah, well, now that I've learned all about Matisse, I want to see other Matisses that aren't in the barns.
Very interesting, in a way, when we talk about the intended audience.
And this is almost an enamel.
a contradiction in a way.
My kid, my 13-year-old daughter, you know, she's playing with these things.
Literacy of the new generation.
I got a new, you know, a new CD.
She's the one that loads it and gets going.
And they introduce, you know, the adult, so to speak.
Are you mindful of the fact that children today, in this odd circumstance, this odd inversion, are more
computer literate, shall we say, are capable, computer capable, than the adults who you might be trying to reach with the CD-ROM.
Well, very much so, but I'm also trying to reach those kids, too, because, sure, they're interested in the technology.
They're not interested in the art.
I've had more cases of where they're interested in because they can play around with it.
You know, this art, these stories and this thing about art are really interesting, and they learn about that, or they're going to learn about FDR, even though they didn't care about FDR, you know?
You see, I review children's books, too.
And I maintain, you know, if you're writing a children's book, you have to impress the parent first.
I mean, if you're writing it and you're producing it, it's the parent.
That's the one that's going to buy it.
Buy the book for the kid.
Right.
Introduce it to the kids.
I mean, you have this level, this filter that you have to go.
It's like selling dog food.
You're not selling to the dog.
You're selling to the owner.
Who cares what it tastes like?
You want to see what the label is.
In a way, but this is more...
appeal.
Sure.
I'm sorry, you don't mind jumping around?
No, we're having lots of fun.
I am definitely having lots of fun.
Do you have a sense of the shapes of things to come, books of the future, libraries of the future?
Because that is, you know, do you not have a clue?
Well, I think a lot about that.
In fact, one of my, back in 1988, I filed a design patent for an idea that
It was granted, I think, in 1991, and it dealt with reference books and, well, libraries and books in general, electronic books.
Back then, it was, C. D. Browns were just coming out, and... 1988, and it was granted in 91.
Yeah.
Okay.
It was with the patent office, I guess?
Yeah.
Patent office in D.C.
You'll have to tell me your background at some point, too, but we'll get back to that.
Yeah.
Well, I remember as a kid, you know, when you're going to the library and you're doing research, and
you know, great, I found these books, but the problem is they're reference books.
I can't check them out.
The other books you also want, they're checked out and they'll never be back because somebody took them.
You know, that's sort of the frustration of working in the libraries.
And I always felt that, you know, if they were on CD, then they wouldn't have to be reference books.
Everybody could have them because you could stamp them out really, really cheaply.
So I had this idea of creating an electronic book that you would slide a CD in and it would have
a touch screen LCD and speakers on it and be no bigger than a regular hardback book that you could just carry around and you could go and these CDs would cost 50 cents a piece and you could just, you know, buy anything you want.
Well, the CDs have started to happen.
You know, you can get Encarta on a CD and the manufacturing cost is, you know, under a buck.
But there's tons of them.
So the concept of encyclopedia is not quite so referencing anymore.
Everybody can have them.
But the idea is that, you know, hopefully someday people will have
an electronic book that starts to mimic a real book that has those kind of features to it.
It'll be a screen?
It'll be a screen.
It'll be like a book.
Hopefully the idea is that you won't be able to tell the difference in quality.
We've got a ways to go before that's going to happen, apparently.
How is it going to replicate a page?
To show you a page exactly like a real page.
The whole thing about, you know, you would actually have to flip a page and, well, you would press a button and it would flip the page looking like a page.
Didn't Bill Gates do that with his own book?
Yeah, in the back on his CD.
That's on the CD.
But the idea that I had was to create this device that would be a portable electronic hardback book that you could just put lots of CDs in.
What did you call it?
What did I call that thing?
I'd like to check this out.
Do you have some paperwork that you could send me on this?
Yeah, I have it at home.
I'll bring it.
The idea was a patent on the design, an idea to create an electronic CD-ROM book.
And they granted the patent?
Yeah.
This is my card.
Never mind the title and stuff, just for my interest.
My own little company, I do a syndicated call.
Go ahead, I'm sorry.
I sent a copy to the chairman of Apple back at that time, John Scully.
He was interested in and also got a guy named Jean-Louis Gasset, who was head of technology at Apple that time, to look at it.
And they were exploring devices, something like that, too.
But they ultimately decided they didn't have the technology to create it at that time.
So how can you get the patent on something for which there's no technology yet to produce it?
Well, it's a design patent.
It's an idea for, here's something that
of how something might work.
So it's probably very hard to be able to detect it then.
Yeah, yeah.
The guy who invented the weed eater, you know.
Right, right, somebody else knocked it off.
But I just thought, what the hell, I'll try and I'll just put this out there just to see.
What were you doing then?
Back then I was working for a company called The Voyager Company that started doing some of the very first, well, I started Voyager in like 90, but before then I was producing interactive video discs.
Oh, you were?
Yeah.
So your background is in this stuff.
Well, here's my background.
Let's see.
In college, I did student films, but I was at UCLA.
I majored in environmental science, and I also have a minor in astronomy and physics, because that was an interest of mine, too.
And I got out of school, and I pursued a career in environmental science, and I worked for...
consulting company called Dames & Moore, their big environmental consulting firm.
Went to another firm, and because at that time the whole environmental movement was kind of dying down, went to, at this other firm, I started doing more strategic planning, strategic management consultant.
Was doing that for a while, very much in the business.
I got my MBA while I was doing that, and I was pursuing the corporate route.
And it's kind of weird, but after a while, I worked with a number of big companies, you know,
I worked on the divestiture of Pacific Bell from AT&T.
I did restructuring of big companies, government agencies.
But it got to the time when you're working in consulting, you have to make a decision whether you want to be a partner or not.
And I decided that, no, just making companies rich was not that fulfilling for me.
And then to me, I was really much more interested in
in education and teaching and things like that.
And I was interested in film, too.
And multimedia didn't exist at that time, but I kind of gave up the corporate business stuff, went into business for myself, doing some consulting, because I could make enough money to pay the bills working a couple days a week there, but doing other things that I liked.
I got a teaching credential.
I started working with schools.
developed computer software doing some of the things that I was doing consulting, strategic planning, strategic management consulting.
It's funny because the software I developed back then in the early days of computing, the first thing we did was on an Apple II, and that's pretty hard to do on an Apple II, and then we went to other machines, and eventually when the IBM PC came out, I developed the version for the IBM PC, but
What did you call it?
The name of it was Spans, which was an organization analysis software.
Funny, I ended up talking to another guy who's the
a Seattle partner of this firm that I used to work for.
It's in a big international consulting firm.
And he says, yeah, you're the creator of Spanish?
I go, yeah.
I said, what's it doing these days?
Oh, it's a $40 million consulting practice.
Creates it everywhere.
It's been used all over the world.
I said, well, that's great.
But anyway, so I have this weird background of education, software, a little bit of dabbling in film.
And one of my hobbies has been to sort of study feature film production anyway.
And then...
So in working with school districts, I ended up getting involved in doing some interactive educational video disc projects.
And then from there, that's how I went to the Voyager company.
They produced video discs, and they also produced some of the very first CD-ROMs.
And they were kind of a... If you look in sort of the history of multimedia, they were generally considered to be
the pioneers of creating really interesting things in multimedia.
So you were a natural for them.
How did you come into this position?
This position, they were starting to do interactive multimedia here.
It was called Continuum at that time.
And I was recruited to come up here and help start doing CD-ROMs because that's what I had done for the Voyager company.
And initially it would be in the nuts and bolts end of it?
Creating.
Creating these CDs, yeah.
But how about now in selection of
Charles was saying earlier, he sees this as what you're trying to do as a celebration of the high spots of the archive.
There's no way you can ever make these stupid CD-ROMs out of everything that you have, but you see something really compelling that really suggests all the elements that you mentioned earlier that go into making a very effective thing to jump on it.
How does that process work?
It's a very complex mix of thinking about what we have in the archive, the different areas, what compelling stories there are out of there, intersecting that with, okay, who are the people that are interested in CD-ROM, have the capability of one of these machines, what are they interested in, and how does that intersect?
And what are the different kinds of things that can show off
different areas of the archive so that it's not just about art or science or history or something like that to try and diversify.
So that's a pretty broad mix.
And then when you're looking at the customer side, you also have to see how many are in that particular market segment and does it make sense.
And that's always a challenge.
So as the archive, are you involved in the acquisition of stuff?
No.
So that's Charles' area.
That's Charles' area.
We talked about that.
So then you're working with what we've got.
Working with what we have.
This is what we've got.
Well, we're working with what we have mostly, and also a little bit on what I'd like to do, too.
I mean, you know, I was telling you about Leonardo da Vinci and my interest back in 1981.
I can't wait to do that.
Well, I mean, my pushing for that is a big reason why we're doing it.
Mm-hmm.
Actually, people think it's because Bill bought the codex.
Well, that would be my assumption.
Yeah, but it's actually not because I was related to that.
I would have gotten to that.
I would have just assumed that he got it.
That's not the case.
No, actually, it's funny because he bought that, and you know, of course, it went on tour.
And so it's actually never been here.
We've never seen it.
The images that we have in the product of the Codex Lester are actually...
the transparencies that Armand Hammer shot in 1981 when he first bought it.
The ones I have in my Christie's catalog at home, in other words.
Exactly.
So, you know, even though Bill owns it, there's very little he had to do with us doing it other than us asking him, you know, is it okay if we do this thing on Leonardo?
He said, yeah, sure.
I think what you're doing, what I've written, what I've written Publishers Weekly, sounds really exciting.
Of course, Leonardo wrote backwards.
in a language that most of us are going to be unable to decipher.
Right.
What you're going to do, apparently, is you can click onto a section here.
I'll show you.
Would you like to see?
Yeah, I'd love to see that.
All right.
That's something that you're never going to get out of a book or anything.
Exactly.
Because I remember looking at the Codex, 1981.
I thought, wow, look at these drawings.
They're amazing.
I'm looking at handwriting.
I'm trying to make out letters.
And I realized it's largely iconic.
You know, it symbolizes this is something that Leonardo did.
But I don't have the faintest clue about what's really going on in the writing.
And sure, we've heard all our life, Leonardo is a genius, right?
And it's pretty much third hand.
How many of us have ever read Leonardo's writings?
Nobody.
And I said, that's what we have to do.
We have to allow people to go in and really see his writings and
And have an expert there at your side to tell you the significance of this.
He was right about some things and he was wrong about some things.
But to be able to see that, that's a magic connection.
And that's one thing you're going to be able to do.
And that's, you know, an inspiration, I think, in your part, really.
Of course, it's made for us.
It's Lord and Nicole.
Well, where do you see it?
And so what you're going to do now is penetrate.
Yeah.
And you're helping your reader.
Do you call these people your readers, by the way, or your viewers, your customers?
I like viewers, but some people end up calling them users.
Users is probably the... But, you know, you know what I say about users is that there's only two businesses that have users and one's illegal.
Oh, please.
Yeah, no problem.
Toss it over there.
Oh, there.
Now, what's that comet there?
Oh, it's, you know, I'm very interested in astronomy.
That was the last comet that just came.
I saw it one night.
Yeah, I mean, the comet was out there.
Yeah, you have to be in a dark place.
When you're in a dark place, boy, it was pretty amazing.
It was pretty dark.
Yeah.
What are we doing?
What's that?
That was my little sound.
Do you still do astronomy?
Yeah, although not as much.
I live in Seattle.
When I was in L.A., I did a lot more.
It seems to me the air is a lot clearer up here.
Yeah, the air is clearer, but in astronomy, what matters is... You can do better astronomy in L.A.
Yeah, if the clouds are there, it just doesn't work.
Let me see.
I'll turn.
Can I grab an Altoid?
Oh, please.
That's what it's there for.
It's pointed away.
Save your tape.
Oh, good.
Here, why don't we stop it for just a second.
I'm going to start it over.
Things work, some things don't work, and it takes a little while.
They haven't gone through the process of optimizing to make sure it runs fast on the CD yet.
They just put it on the CD so all the elements are there.
Now, these are your technicians who are... Right, they're down on the second floor working.
And I took a walk through the room.
Okay.
Just pick it up just to get the audio.
Are these things scripted to run a certain length?
Excellent.
Good for you.
that the title of the main purpose was.
Painting is the way to know the maker of all marvelous things.
In order to give the true science of the flight of birds, heaven must first give the science of the wind.
The air moves like a fervent, carries the clouds with us as it be seen in ancient trees.
The genius of man may make various images, but it will never discover a more beautiful one than nature says.
I am not to be accused of idleness.
Well, that'll run a lot smoother when those things are going.
All right.
I don't know if the welcome is there.
Maybe there is a welcome.
We'll see.
Ever since I was a child, I have been both fascinated and inspired by Leonardo da Vinci.
The notebooks of this Italian Renaissance genius reflect the creative potential of the human mind, the power of invention, and the revelation in discovery.
I've always admired Leonardo as a visionary in so many ways.
He was hundreds of years ahead of his time.
Using his extraordinary abilities as an artist and scientist, he pursued such questions as why the sky is blue, why the moon shines, and why seashells are found on mountain tops.
His paintings, drawings, and manuscripts hold the answers to these questions.
and reflect his profound understanding of nature.
The Codex Leicester is a remarkable example of Leonardo's mind at work.
It is fitting that this great thinker and artist would inspire creative and technological achievements in multimedia.
This CD-ROM allows you to examine Leonardo's ideas as never before.
For example, our unique translation tool
The Codoscope truly brings the writings of Leonardo to life.
It is my sincere hope that this project will help others draw as much inspiration from Leonardo as I have.
Was it your idea to have him introduce it?
It wasn't my idea.
Very cool.
But we think it's appropriate.
This is Professor Martin Kemp, who is the professor of art history at Oxford, and widely considered to be one of the one or two scholars on Leonardo in the world.
So who, now, where are you getting the authorities?
Do people recommend them?
Well, when we first started this project, part of my work was to figure out who's who and start to negotiate and deal with him.
So I went to England and met with him.
I had spoken with a number of people and the only name that kept coming up was Martin Kent.
Yeah.
And he has a great background in
art, but also in natural science.
So he's a great combination for both.
I just want to see the CODIS.
Yeah, no, I... Yeah, well, we'll cut right to the chase here.
Yeah, it's very cool.
We're going to move on to Doug.
He's got to leave us.
Why don't you do that right now, then?
Well, no, you have a few minutes to see this.
I'll go right to the CODIS scope here, and you can look.
And then you can come back.
Okay.
I think we've covered most of the stuff, too, so... Okay.
And whatever...
He's going to be working on the book for a while, so we can always come back and follow up.
I probably will even come back here at some point, you know, down the line.
Okay, so these are all the pages of the Codex, and there are a number of themes that appear in the different pages, and you can mouse over them.
Oh, that's wild.
There should be 72 pages there.
Yep.
There's also an introduction.
So you just punched into one.
Yep.
And, in fact, if you go to any other section, you can kind of see what else is there.
But you can go get insights about this page, get a synopsis, look at the written order of it.
So here's the page.
Oh, that's great.
Look at that.
It's easier to see if you flip it around.
So you can see, look.
What I want to see is how you... Oh, there it is.
That's really... That is spectacular.
Look at the words here.
He's talking to you.
Remember how I have to demonstrate first the distance of the earth and find out his true size?
You just couldn't do this anywhere else.
I mean, with a book, I don't know how a book could do it unless you have these overlays.
Yeah.
Look at this.
You can see a literal translation of his writing and start to check out the words.
Congratulations.
That's really spectacular.
Isn't that great?
It would be a very powerful tool, I think, to help people to understand and interpret the document.
But also, you know, there's a brand new book out now called Great Books, a guy by the name David Denby.
I'm going to be on a panel with him in Miami next November.
And, you know, he went back to college to read the great books he read 30 years earlier in his, you know, when he was an undergraduate at Columbia.
Leonardo Boyd insisted on observation.
Who understands these things?
Who has the time to go and look up a... But you've made this stuff accessible.
Together, all the references from so many areas.
You've actually made... That's right, yeah.
It's in context.
I remember seeing a literal translation of it, but I go, where is that?
Where is that illustration you're talking about?
And this is a way to keep them both together.
That's terrific.
That's great.
I'll shut this off.
We'll go see...